## Worked Example

We conclude the chapter with a brief worked example showing a few usage
scenarios of the protocol. We use [UML]{acronym-label="UML"
acronym-form="singular+short"} Sequence Diagrams to show the interaction
between Participant roles.

### A Finder Becomes a Reporter

As mentioned in
ยง[\[sec:finder_hidden\]](#sec:finder_hidden){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:finder_hidden"}, Finders have a few hidden state
transitions before the [CVD]{acronym-label="CVD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} process really begins. An example of this
is shown in Figure
[\[fig:finder_hidden\]](#fig:finder_hidden){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:finder_hidden"}. The Finder must discover, validate, and
prioritize their finding before initiating the [CVD]{acronym-label="CVD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} process.

Finders become Reporters when they report a vulnerability to someone
else. Figure
[\[fig:initial_report_to_vendor\]](#fig:initial_report_to_vendor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:initial_report_to_vendor"} shows a Finder sending a
report ($RS$) in conjunction with an embargo proposal ($EP$) to a
Vendor. The Vendor receives the report and updates their state
accordingly. Then the Vendor replies to acknowledge receipt of the
report and the embargo proposal, and confirms that they (i.e., the
Vendor) are aware of the report ($RK$, $EK$, and $CV$, respectively).
Note that the $EK$ response is intended to convey receipt of the embargo
proposal ($EP$) but does not constitute acceptance of the proposal. We
will discuss that in the next subsection.

### Vendor Evaluates Embargo {#sec:vendor_eval_embargo_seq}

In Figure
[\[fig:vendor_eval_embargo\]](#fig:vendor_eval_embargo){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:vendor_eval_embargo"}, we show a variety of responses a
Vendor might have to an embargo proposal. First is a basic accept
sequence in which the Vendor accepts the proposed embargo and tells the
Reporter this through an $EA$ message, as shown in Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_accept_embargo\]](#fig:seq_vendor_accept_embargo){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_accept_embargo"}. The Reporter acknowledges
this with an $EK$ in response.

Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_reject_embargo\]](#fig:seq_vendor_reject_embargo){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_reject_embargo"} shows a rejected proposal. As
above, this is a simple sequence where the Vendor indicates their
rejection of the proposal with an $ER$ message, and the Reporter
acknowledges this with an $EK$ message.

Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_counter_embargo\]](#fig:seq_vendor_counter_embargo){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_counter_embargo"} demonstrates a Vendor
embargo counterproposal. The Vendor responds to the Reporter's prior
$EP$ message with an $EP$ message of their own. The Reporter initially
acknowledges the counterproposal with an $RK$ message and then evaluates
it and accepts with an $EA$ message. Finally, the Vendor acknowledges
the acceptance with an $EK$ message. Note, however, that there is no
active embargo until the Reporter accepts it. This method of
counterproposal might delay the establishment of an embargo.

Finally, Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_accept_revise_embargo\]](#fig:seq_vendor_accept_revise_embargo){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_accept_revise_embargo"} offers what we think
is a better approach than a simple counterproposal. In this
"Accept-then-Counter" sequence, we see that the Vendor initially accepts
the Reporter's proposed embargo and immediately follows up with a
revision proposal of their own. The difference is that by initially
accepting the proposal, the Vendor ensures that they are in an active
embargo state before attempting to renegotiate. The sequence shown in
Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_accept_revise_embargo\]](#fig:seq_vendor_accept_revise_embargo){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_accept_revise_embargo"} is intended to be
consistent with the previous discussion surrounding default embargo
strategies in
ยง[\[sec:default_embargoes\]](#sec:default_embargoes){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:default_embargoes"}. One might think of this as the
"Yes-And" rule for embargo negotiations.[^3]

### Vendor Sets Priority

Figure
[\[fig:vendor_priority\]](#fig:vendor_priority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:vendor_priority"} offers two responses from a Vendor in
the course of prioritizing a report. Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_accepts_report\]](#fig:seq_vendor_accepts_report){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_accepts_report"} shows a Vendor accepting the
report for further work (presumably to develop a patch) with an $RA$
message. On the contrary, Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_defers_report\]](#fig:seq_vendor_defers_report){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_defers_report"} shows the Vendor deferring the
report with an $RD$ message. In both cases, the Reporter acknowledges
the Vendor's messages with an $RK$ message.

### Coordination With a Coordinator {#sec:coordinating_with_coordinator}

Figure
[\[fig:finder_coordinator_vendor_seq\]](#fig:finder_coordinator_vendor_seq){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:finder_coordinator_vendor_seq"} shows the process of a
Reporter engaging a Coordinator, who, in turn, engages a Vendor. The
process begins in Figure
[\[fig:seq_reporter_engages_coordinator\]](#fig:seq_reporter_engages_coordinator){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_reporter_engages_coordinator"} with the Reporter
sending a report along with an embargo proposal to the Coordinator
($RS,EP$). The Coordinator acknowledges receipt with an $RK,EK$
response. After evaluating the proposed embargo, the Coordinator accepts
it with an $EA$ message. The Coordinator proceeds to validate and
prioritize the report, emitting an $RV$ and $RA$ along the way.

Proceeding to Figure
[\[fig:seq_coordinator_engages_vendor\]](#fig:seq_coordinator_engages_vendor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_coordinator_engages_vendor"}, the Coordinator now
acts as a proxy for the Reporter, notifying the Vendor and passing along
the embargo information through an $RS,EP$ message of its own. The
Vendor accepts the existing embargo ($EA$) and proceeds to validate
($RV$) and prioritize ($RA$) the report. Relevant responses from the
Vendor are passed through to the Reporter. Having accepted the report
for further work, the Vendor continues with creating a fix for the
reported vulnerability. When complete, the Vendor conveys their
readiness to the Coordinator, who in turn passes this information along
to the Reporter through the $CF$ message.

### Embargo Teardown, Publish, and Close

Any Participant can initiate an embargo teardown. We happened to show
the case where the Coordinator initiates it in Figure
[\[fig:seq_coordinator_embargo_teardown\]](#fig:seq_coordinator_embargo_teardown){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_coordinator_embargo_teardown"}, sending an embargo
termination message ($ET$) to all parties in the case (Reporter and
Vendor in this scenario). Recipients of the $ET$ message acknowledge
receipt and update their [EM]{acronym-label="EM"
acronym-form="singular+short"} state accordingly.

Once the embargo has been exited, any Participant may now publish. In
Figure
[\[fig:seq_vendor_publishes_first\]](#fig:seq_vendor_publishes_first){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_vendor_publishes_first"}, we show the Vendor
publishing first. They notify the Coordinator that they have published
using a $CP$ message to convey that information about the vulnerability
is now public. The Coordinator relays this information to the Reporter.
Both the Reporter and the Coordinator publish their own reports shortly
thereafter.

Having no further work to be done on the case, the Reporter closes their
report and tells the Coordinator using an $RC$ message in Figure
[\[fig:seq_reporter_closes_case\]](#fig:seq_reporter_closes_case){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seq_reporter_closes_case"}. This prompts the Coordinator
to review their outstanding tasks and decide to initiate the closure of
their own report. In turn, the Coordinator relays this to the Vendor,
who also closes their report.

Note that for all three scenarios shown in Figure
[\[fig:embargo_teardown_and_publish\]](#fig:embargo_teardown_and_publish){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:embargo_teardown_and_publish"}, there is no specific
order in which Participants must act. We could just as easily have shown
the Reporter initiating an embargo teardown because of a leaked media
report or the Vendor exiting an embargo early because they had their fix
ready sooner than expected.

Furthermore, our protocol only sets a discrete end to the embargo
period, it intentionally does *not* address a publication schedule. Once
the embargo has been exited, *any* Participant may publish at any time.
Participants might choose to coordinate publication schedules more
closely, but there is nothing in the protocol to require it. With the
recognition that more concise publication scheduling might be needed in
some situations, we revisit this concern as future work in
ยง[\[sec:pub_sync\]](#sec:pub_sync){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:pub_sync"}.

Finally, report closure is a per-Participant choice. We chose to show a
simple case where all Participants agreed at approximately the same time
that there was nothing further to be done. This will not always be the
case, nor is it necessary.

[^1]: As we discuss in
    ยง[\[sec:finder_hidden\]](#sec:finder_hidden){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:finder_hidden"}, the Finder's states
    $q^{rm} \in \{R,I,V\}$ are not observable to the
    [CVD]{acronym-label="CVD" acronym-form="singular+short"} process
    because Finders start coordination only when they have already
    reached $q^{rm} = A$.

[^2]: Effective coordination is usually improved with Participants'
    mutual awareness of each other's state, of course.

[^3]: "Yes-And" is a heuristic taken from improvisational theatre in
    which Participants are encouraged to agree with whatever their
    counterpart suggests and add to it rather than reject it outright.
    It serves as a good model for cooperation among parties who share an
    interest in a positive outcome.
