# Conclusion {#sec:conclusion}

In this report, we developed a state-based model of the
[CVD]{acronym-label="CVD" acronym-form="singular+short"} process that
enables us to enumerate all possible [CVD]{acronym-label="CVD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} histories $\mathcal{H}$ and defined a set
of desired criteria $\mathbb{D}$ that are preferable in each history.
This allowed us to create a partially ordered set over all histories and
to compute a baseline expected frequency for each desired criteria. We
also proposed a new performance indicator for comparing actual
[CVD]{acronym-label="CVD" acronym-form="singular+short"} experiences
against a benchmark, and proposed an initial benchmark based on the
expected frequency of each desired criteria. We demonstrated this
performance indicator in a few examples, indicating that at least some
[CVD]{acronym-label="CVD" acronym-form="singular+short"} practices
appear to be doing considerably better than random. Finally, we posited
a way to apply these metrics to measure the efficacy of
[MPCVD]{acronym-label="MPCVD" acronym-form="singular+short"} processes.

The resulting state-transition model has numerous applications to
formalizing the specification of [CVD]{acronym-label="CVD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} policies and processes. We discussed how
the model can be used to specify embargo and disclosure policies, and to
bring consistency to coordination practices. We further showed how the
model can be used to reduce uncertainty regarding actions to take even
in the presence of incomplete [CVD]{acronym-label="CVD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} information. We also suggested how the
model can be used to normalize frequently-used terms that have lacked
consistent definitions among practitioners of [CVD]{acronym-label="CVD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} and [VM]{acronym-label="VM"
acronym-form="singular+short"}. Finally, we demonstrated the potential
application of this model to US [VEP]{acronym-label="VEP"
acronym-form="singular+short"} scope definitions.

In combination, the model described in this report offers a way to
observe, communicate, and measure the quality improvement of
[CVD]{acronym-label="CVD" acronym-form="singular+short"} and
[MPCVD]{acronym-label="MPCVD" acronym-form="singular+short"} practices
across the board.

::: feedbackrqst
The [CERT/CC]{acronym-label="CERT/CC" acronym-form="singular+short"} is
interested to receive feedback on this report. Although every action was
taken to ensure the completeness and accuracy of the information
contained within this report, the possibility for improvement still
exists. Please feel free to contact the author providing
recommendations, corrections, opinions, or requests for clarification.

Feedback may be submitted at <https://www.sei.cmu.edu/contact-us/>

To contact the author please address all mail to:\
Software Engineering Institute\
4500 Fifth Avenue\
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2612\
USA\
Email: <info@sei.cmu.edu>\
:::

