
![image](assets/Software_Engineering_Institute_Unitmark_Red_and_Black.jpg){width="2.5in"}

A State-Based Model for Multi-Party Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure
(MPCVD)

Allen Householder Allen Householder\
Jonathan Spring Jonathan Spring\
\
\
\
\
\

**July 2021**

\
CMU/SEI-2021-SR-021\
DOI: 10.1184/R1/16416771 DOI: 10.1184/R1/16416771\

**CERT Division**\

\[DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A\] Approved for public release and unlimited
distribution.\

<http://www.sei.cmu.edu>

Copyright  2021 Carnegie Mellon University.

This material is based upon work funded and supported by the Department
of Homeland Security under Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0002 with Carnegie
Mellon University for the operation of the Software Engineering
Institute, a federally funded research and development center sponsored
by the United States Department of Defense.

The view, opinions, and/or findings contained in this material are those
of the author(s) and should not be construed as an official Government
position, policy, or decision, unless designated by other documentation.

References herein to any specific commercial product, process, or
service by trade name, trade mark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not
necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or
favoring by Carnegie Mellon University or its Software Engineering
Institute.

This report was prepared for the SEI Administrative Agent AFLCMC/AZS 5
Eglin Street Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-2100

NO WARRANTY. THIS CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS FURNISHED ON AN \"AS-IS\" BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON
UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR
PURPOSE OR MERCHANTABILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS OBTAINED FROM USE OF
THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT MAKE ANY WARRANTY OF
ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO FREEDOM FROM PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR COPYRIGHT
INFRINGEMENT.

\[DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A\] This material has been approved for public
release and unlimited distribution. Please see Copyright notice for
non-US Government use and distribution.

Internal use:

-   Permission to reproduce this material and to prepare derivative
    works from this material for internal use is granted, provided the
    copyright and "No Warranty" statements are included with all
    reproductions and derivative works.

External use:

-   This material may be reproduced in its entirety, without
    modification, and freely distributed in written or electronic form
    without requesting formal permission. Permission is required for any
    other external and/or commercial use. Requests for permission should
    be directed to the Software Engineering Institute at
    permission@sei.cmu.edu.

-   These restrictions do not apply to U.S. government entities.

    Carnegie Mellon, CERT and CERT Coordination Center are registered in
    the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office by Carnegie Mellon University.

DM21-0607

