## Reporting Behavior {#sec:reporting_bt}

The *CERT Guide to Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure* describes the
reporting phase as the process of identifying parties that need to be
informed about the vulnerability and then notifying them
[@householder2017cert]. Reporting only works if the intended recipient
has the ability to receive reports, as outlined in
ยง[1.2](#sec:receive_reports_bt){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:receive_reports_bt"}.

The Reporting Behavior Tree is shown in Figure
[\[fig:bt_reporting\]](#fig:bt_reporting){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bt_reporting"}. The tree describes a Participant that
performs reporting until either their effort limit is met, or they run
out of Participants to notify.

### Identify Participants Behavior {#sec:identify_participants}

The Identify Participants Behavior Tree, shown in Figure
[\[fig:bt_identify_participants\]](#fig:bt_identify_participants){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bt_identify_participants"}, ends when all relevant
parties have been identified. Until that condition is met, the
Participant can proceed with identifying Vendors, Coordinators, or other
parties relevant to the coordination of the case. Note that we are
intentionally avoiding setting any requirements about *who* is relevant
to a case since we leave that to each Participant's judgment.

### Notify Others Behavior {#sec:notify_others}

The Notify Others Behavior Tree is shown in Figure
[\[fig:bt_notify_others\]](#fig:bt_notify_others){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bt_notify_others"}. Its goal is for all intended
recipients to receive the report, thereby reaching the $q^{rm} \in R$
state. Each pass through this part of the tree chooses a Participant
from a list of eligible recipients constructed in the Identify
Participants Behavior. The method for choosing the recipient is left
unspecified since Participants can prioritize recipients how they see
fit.

The process proceeds to clean up the eligible recipients list when
either the recipient is already believed to be in $q^{rm} \in R$ or if
the effort expended in trying to reach the recipient has exceeded the
Participant's limit. Such limits are entirely left to the discretion of
each Participant. If the chosen recipient is pruned by this branch, the
branch returns *Success*.

If the chosen recipient was not pruned, then the cleanup branch fails
and execution transfers to the second branch to notify the recipient.
The first step in the notification branch is a check for an existing
embargo. If the embargo management state is one of
$q^{em} \in \{ N,P,X\}$, there is no active embargo, and the Participant
can proceed with notification. Otherwise, in the case of an already
active embargo (i.e., $q^{em} \in \{A,R\}$), there is an additional
check to ensure that the potential recipient's policy is compatible with
any existing embargo. This check allows for a reporting Participant to
skip a recipient if they are likely to cause premature termination of an
extant embargo.

Once at least one of these checks is passed, the notification sequence
proceeds through finding the recipient's contact information, sending
the report, and updating the Participant's knowledge of the recipient's
report management state.
